# Chapter 14: GTD and Cognitive Science

*Part 3: The Power of the Key Principles*

14
GTD and Cognitive Science
SINCE THE FIRST edition of Getting Things Done  was published,
significant research in the field of social and cognitive psychology has
documented and validated the ef ficacy of the principles that underlie the
methodology . Until recently these practices could be confirmed only
experientially and anecdotally . Anyone who had ever applied the GTD
techniques of capturing, clarifying, or ganizing, and reflecting on the
resulting inventory acknowledged the same results: greater clarity , control,
and focus, along with all the resulting personal and or ganizational benefits
associated with that experience. If you have to any degree begun to
implement the practices I have put forward so far , you will no doubt have
noticed some positive increase in your own demeanor .
Rigorous studies compiled by experts in the field of cognitive science,
ranging from personal to or ganizational aspects, have begun to provide data
that gives foundational support to this methodology and why and how its
improvements are produced. In some sense this may seem like someone’ s
proving that gravity exists after we’ve all been experiencing it and dealing
with it since we were conscious. But from another perspective it gives
perhaps needed credence to the advice for mastering workflow I’ve put
forward here, and to why such seemingly simple processes and behaviors
described in Getting Things  Done have such a compelling result.
The supporting research has emer ged within several frameworks and
categories:
Positive psychology
Distributed cognition: the value of an external mind
Relieving the cognitive load of incompletions
Flow theory
Self-leadership theory
Goal-striving via implementation intentions
Psychological capital (PsyCap)
GTD and Positive Psychology
In 2000 Martin Seligman took on the presidency of the American
Psychological Association. For his presidential address he challenged the
profession to shift its focus away from simply describing, studying, and
diagnosing the negative aspects of the human condition and to begin
devoting more attention to the positive aspects of what it means to be
human. Of course, his message was simply a more mainstream embodiment
of Abraham Maslow’ s ideas from the mid-twentieth century of personal
fulfillment as the richest arena of psychology .
But since Seligman’ s call to action, positive psychology has blossomed into
a full-fledged component of the field.
The research generated by this change in perspective has been conducted at
both the basic and applied levels. It has added to our understanding of a
myriad of psychological constructs and has been used to improve the lives of
many .
Positive psychology is a vast discipline, but a sampling of its relevant
aspects includes happiness, psychological well-being, flow/optimal
experience, meaning, passion, purpose, authentic leadership, strengths,
values, character , and virtue. Graduate education programs in these areas
have emer ged across the world and continue to expand.
How is this relevant to Getting Things Done ? GTD is more than just a way
to manage tasks and projects. In many respects it is more concerned with
fundamental issues of meaningful work, mindful living, and psychological
well-being than simply of fering methods for being more ef ficient or
productive for their own sake. The emphasis (and requirement) of outcome
thinking concerning the stuf f we encounter , as well as achieving a functional
way to capture, clarify , or ganize, and assess the results so we can think more
clearly , describes the core practices that truly make the actual experience of
life better .
That said (and experienced, if you have!), it is still quite interesting to
examine some of the various theories and studies that have focused on the
more specific aspects of the relationship of our psyche, our well-being, and
our performance—all with close correlation to the principles and practices of
Getting  Things Done.
Distributed Cognition: The V alue of an External Mind Y our mind is for
having  ideas, not for holding  them.
In 2008 a fascinating paper , “Getting Things Done: The Science Behind
Stress-Free Productivity ,” was published in a professional journal by two
researchers in Belgium who analyzed my methodology specifically from the
perspective of verifiable data and working theories from cognitive science .*
Their brilliant and detailed assessments and conclusions extend far beyond
what I can do justice to here (the paper is worthy of multiple reads), but
suf fice it to say that its thesis is profound: your mind is designed to have
ideas, based upon pattern detection, but it isn’ t designed to remember much
of anything!
Because of the way the mind developed, it is brilliant at recognition, but
terrible at recall. Y ou can glance at today’ s calendar and in the course of a
few seconds get a coherent sense of the day and its contents and contexts.
But you’d have a terrible time trying to recall the contents of the next
fourteen days on your calendar merely from memory .
A wonderful exposition of the new discoveries in the science of cognition,
related to our limited capacity to manage and maintain awareness of relevant
data in the information age, and the necessity of building and utilizing an
“external brain,” was put forward by Daniel Levitin in his book The
Or ganized  Mind . *
The bottom line is that when you use your memory as your or ganizing
system (as most everyone on the planet still does, for most of what they’re
doing to manage their lives), your mind will ef fectively become
overwhelmed and incompetent, because you are demanding of it intense
work for which it is not well equipped.
If, however , you are able to bring its attention to bear appropriately and
ef ficiently to create the optimal triggers for later thinking and action (such as
reading an e-mail, then setting a meeting on your calendar to deal with its
issue or opportunity), then it gets to relax and rely on the automatic and
elegant thinking it can do when presented specific things on which to focus,
in the proper context. Y ou trust you’ll see that meeting on your calendar
suf ficiently in advance to be prepared for it.
GTD provides the methodology for identifying those things that need
focused
attention, applying it ef ficiently on the front end and or ganizing the triggers
for appropriate thinking at the right time. The Belgian researchers crafted an
elegant exposition of the science behind ef ficiently maximizing what our
minds are good for and what they’re not, creating a framework for how we
can more ef fectively produce profound results with minimal thinking! *
Relieving the Cognitive Load of Incompletions
Much fruitful work has been done in the early part of this century by Dr . Roy
Baumeister et al. in determining the ef fects on consciousness of unfinished
items
—goals, projects, outcomes, etc.—that have been committed to but not yet
completed. His conclusions simply verify what I’ve experienced for decades:
uncompleted tasks take up room in the mind, which then limits clarity and
focus .*
But interestingly , in alignment with the GTD practices, Baumeister has also
proven that completion of such items is not required to relieve that burden
on the psyche. What is needed is a trusted plan that ensures forward
engagement will happen. *
In Baumeister ’ s model merely determining the next action to fulfill a
commitment is a suf ficient end result of “planning”—as long as the trigger
or reminder is parked in a place that we trust we’ll look within a reasonable
amount of time. My thinking and model were heavily cited in his wonderful
book W illpower , which positions them within a rich context of managing the
mental
“muscle” we must continually employ , especially in knowledge work. *
Flow Theory
One of the more popular concepts in this field, which has often been
associated with GTD, has been the idea of “flow”—the state of optimal
performance and engagement. Flow is what the athletes refer to as being “in
the zone,” and it can be closely correlated with the idea of “mind like water ,”
which I introduced in the first chapter .
The flow experience is marked by various distinct components, several of
which are already implemented by the GTD approach. T o experience flow , it
is necessary that your skills in a given task match the challenge at hand. If
the
challenge exceeds your requisite skill level, you will experience anxiety , and
if your skills exceed the challenge, you will most likely feel bored during the
activity .* Flow is usually accompanied by complete concentration on the
given task, and you typically feel in control and have clear goals in sight.
Individuals in flow generally have an idea of what is coming next and
receive immediate feedback throughout the task. They also experience a
mer ging of action and awareness, during which they lose both their self-
consciousness and their sense of time. They are usually intrinsically
motivated, performing an activity for its own sake and not for an external
reward. Those in flow often are performing at an optimal level and are
completely absorbed in what they are doing. Once individuals have
experienced flow , they are often compelled to repeat the activities that
enabled them to experience it.
Y ou can only put your conscious attention on one thing at a time. If that’ s all
that has  your attention, you’re in flow .
While flow was originally conceptualized by investigating leisure activities
(e.g., rock climbing, painting), Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevr e* found that
individuals are engaged in high-skill, high-challenge activities more often at
work (54 percent) than at leisure (18 percent). Csikszentmihalyi explained
that many jobs inherently contain the type of goals and feedback structures
that would allow one to experience flow at work, a phenomenon that is
associated with higher levels of subjective well-being .*
The GTD approach includes several conditions of the flow experience—
namely , having clear goals and receiving feedback. GTD’ s emphasis on
focusing attention on one task at a time is closely associated with the crux of
the flow experience: being completely absorbed in a singular activity , in
which one’ s stimulus field is limited. Adopting GTD enables individuals to
find flow more easily in their work and personal lives. By getting tasks out
of the mind and into an external system, they can more easily see and track
progress, which is a form of feedback. Having a complete picture of one’ s
commitments in work and life can help individuals make better decisions
about what to pay attention to in any given moment, which, in turn, will
allow them to engage more fully in the task at hand, making flow a more
likely outcome.
Self-Leadership Theory
Self-leadership can be traced back to the mid-1980s as an expansion of the
concept of self-management. According to Neck and Manz ,*  self-leadership
is a process through which individuals control their own behavior ,
influencing themselves through the use of specific behavioral and cognitive
strategies. The popularity of self-leadership has soared via a lar ge number of
practitioner -oriented books, theoretical and empirical journal publications,
inclusion in management and leadership textbooks, and the growth of self-
leadership training programs.
The strategies that comprise self-leadership are commonly separated into
three categories: behavior -focused, natural reward, and constructive thought
pattern.
Behavior -focused strategies  are usually centered on raising individual self-
awareness with the goal of facilitating behavioral management. In the
context of work, these strategies commonly place an emphasis on doing
necessary but unpleasant tasks. This family of strategies includes self-
observation, self–goal setting, self-reward, self-punishment, and self-cuing.
Natural r ewar d strategies  are intended to create situations in which an
individual is motivated or rewarded by the activity itself. These strategies
revolve around reshaping unpleasant tasks or activities to make them more
enjoyable and deliberately focusing attention on the inherently rewarding
aspects of the activities.
Providing yourself the right cues, which you will notice at the right time,
about the right things, is a core practice of stress-free productivity .
Constructive thought pattern strategies  relate specifically to creating ways
of thinking that can positively impact performance. Examples of these
strategies include self-talk, mental imagery , and replacing dysfunctional
beliefs and assumptions.
There are aspects of GTD that connect to each of the three overall types of
self-leadership. One of the most evident is the concept of self-cuing. A well-
constructed GTD system provides for a physical artifact that spurs future
action.
The GTD methodology also embodies the component of natural reward
strategies. There is a sense of pleasure in identifying small yet annoying
tasks
and taking care of them—something a thorough mental RAM dump and
some free time certainly make possible. Finally , a key element of GTD is the
mental component of thinking of your work not simply as a series of lar ge
projects but more directly as concrete next actions. This shift from a
defeatist/overwhelmed attitude to the motivational state that enables you to
move forward on such tasks is a great example of shifting your mind-set in a
positive way .
Using self-leadership strategies has been shown to improve people’ s sense of
self-ef ficacy , and self-ef ficacy is one of the most well-researched constructs
when it comes to or ganizational psychology . It has been connected to job
satisfaction, job performance, and other positive or ganizational behaviors for
both traditional employees and entrepreneurs.
Goal-Striving/Attainment V ia Implementation Intentions
Goals (desired outcomes) are a vital part of life, and GTD can serve to
facilitate both personal and professional goals. Gollwitzer and Oettingen
have conducted a major line of research on goal achievement, incorporating
the idea of
“implementation intentions.” *  In a nutshell they ar gue that the best way to
ensure goal striving (taking actions toward a stated goal) is to create a cause-
and-ef fect link in your mind about when certain goal-relevant actions will be
taken. When you make plans (implementation intentions) ahead of time and
decide what actions will be carried out in which contexts, the proper
behavior is nearly automatically enacted instead of being drawn from your
limited reserve of willpower . In other words, if you can trust that something
you will more or less do automatically will provide suf ficient direction and
juice to move you toward your outcome, you’ll have that juice when needed.
It won’ t be depleted by your constant worrying or thinking about what you
should do and when.
GTD and implementation intentions are linked through using the system as
the trigger or prompt for taking outcome-directed action. For example, you
could set the implementation intention, “When I’m in my of fice with more
than an hour of free time and a high level of ener gy , I’ll look at my task list
and select something challenging and important to work on.” Or , “When it is
Sunday afternoon I will conduct a W eekly Review .” Or , “When I’m feeling
flustered and overwhelmed I’ll do a mental RAM dump.” The number of
such possible implementation intentions is truly endless.
Psychological Capital (PsyCap)
Psychological capital (PsyCap) is a relatively new framework within which
or ganizational psychologists are beginning to evaluate the overall
resourceful state of workers and its ef fect. It consists of four definable
aspects: self-ef ficacy , optimism, resilience, and hope.
Self-efficacy  is the confidence to take on and devote the necessary ef fort to
succeed at challenging tasks.
Optimism  involves making positive attributions about succeeding now and in
the future.
Hope  means persevering toward goals and, when necessary , redirecting
paths to those goals.
Resilience  involves bouncing back to an original—or even better—state of
being after facing adversity and problems.
Individually each of these variables can predict various outcomes to a certain
degree. For example, someone’ s degree of optimism can correlate
statistically with particular results or behaviors. However , when these four
components are considered together in what psychologists now call PsyCap,
you can predict much more than merely the sum of the ef fects of its
component elements. In its relatively short history as a construct, PsyCap
has been connected to many positive individual and or ganizational
outcomes, such as job performanc e* , *
and psychological well-being. *
PsyCap is more of a description of a state than a trait itself—that is, it is
something that can change or be changed, developed, or undermined, almost
minute to minute, as in the example of one’ s mood. In familiar terms it
would reflect the dif ference between your experiencing a good day or a bad
day . Are you feeling on top of your game, or buried by it? The good news is
that such states are malleable—you can do things that can change and
improve them without having to change some inherent aspect of yourself.
Getting Things Done relates directly to all four ingredients of a high PsyCap
and its intended results. By enabling people to create and maintain a
complete picture of their commitments to themselves and others in order to
make good decisions about what to do (or not do) at any given moment, it
automatically builds a sense of confidence and control ( self-efficacy ).
Simply identifying all open loops and moving them from memory to an
external mind while
systematically identifying concrete and doable next actions is a pure exercise
in self-control and directedness. An individual utilizing GTD knows exactly
what needs to be done and exactly what action he can take to achieve it,
given the restrictions of available time, ener gy , and contextual restraints.
Adopting GTD sets people up for greater optimism  because it enables them
to draw connections between the successful completion of projects and their
own purposeful and goal-directed ef forts. Individuals identify meaningful
projects, articulate the next steps needed to complete them, and then ideally
follow through the process until the project is completed. As each “win” is
achieved, it produces greater capacity for making more positive
commitments.
In addition, the focus on front-end decision making in GTD—doing “the
work to define the work”—can be viewed as an exercise in both aspects of
hope  (setting goals and identifying pathways to those goals). Individuals set
goals (“What does ‘done’ look like?”) and identify the tasks needed to
achieve those goals (“What’ s the next action?”) during this front-end
decision-making process.
While no empirical data yet exists for the idea that those individuals who
utilize GTD are more successful in recovering from failure ( r esilience ), it’ s
certainly been validated anecdotally for me from scores of the best and
brightest individuals on the planet. Dealing with serious family emer gencies
or tumultuous changes in their jobs and careers, people have provided
abundant testimonials to attest to their retained sanity , stability , and
productivity by utilizing GTD practices. The methodology gives an
individual a sense of calm and control over a dif ficult situation that allows
them to use their mental faculties to address the task at hand and recalibrate
multiple vectors in real time, as needed. In a time of stress or other adversity ,
those individuals who are able to think most clearly and process the results
more ef ficiently will be more likely to emer ge from the stress in better shape
than those who do not.
The PsyCap model also provides a framework within which to understand
why groups who have integrated GTD as a cultural standard experience a
significant degree of “moving up the food chain,” relative to how their
or ganization responds, interacts, and produces results. Whether or not
PsyCap develops further as a definable, verifiable, and developmental arena
in or ganizational psychology , it’ s a great way to describe the mental,
emotional, reflective, and even physical benefits of what you get from using
GTD.
Undoubtedly during the coming years we will see a continual stream of new
scientific data that will validate what I’ve known was true from day one of
my experience with this model, and what has been shared by countless
others: when
all of our potentially meaningful things are captured, clarified, or ganized,
and reflected upon, the more mature, elegant, and intelligent part of who we
really are can show up at the table. That produces experiences and results
that can’ t be beat.